Progress Report January 2023 (#343)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jan-2023/index.md

+++

> date = "2023-01-30T12:00:00-03:00"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date = "2023-02-11T12:00:00-03:00"
```

title = "Progress Report January 2023"
author = "GoldenX86"

> forum = 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
forum = 724529
```

{{< imgs
	"./shaders.mp4| NVIDIA and Intel are faster at shader building than AMD"
  >}}

But this isn’t just another fix for AMD Windows users. While the objective was accomplished, the benefits didn’t stop there. 
As it turns out, locally stored files are much quicker to save compared to relying on the GPU driver. 
Possibly due to fewer checks being performed? 
All GPU vendors see reduced stuttering when facing new shaders!

The usual limitations apply: the cache still asks the driver for validation, so updating it to a newer or older version will require a recompilation, and since the cache is vendor-specific, you won’t get to keep the cache if you switch to a new GPU from another vendor. (And we’re glad there are more than two options now.)

While Wollnashorn intended this feature to be optional at first, we consider it fully stable, so it’s now enabled by default.
Anyone interested in testing disabling it will find the new option in `Emulation > Configure… > Graphics > Advanced > Use Vulkan pipeline cache`.

{{< imgs
	"./turboui.png| Vulkan only, OpenGL is not this flexible with compute work"
  >}}

> Wollnashorn, delivering another amazing entry for the new year, implemented {{< gh-hovercard "9539" "support for AMD's FidelityFX Super Resolution (FSR) in the OpenGL backend" >}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wollnashorn, delivering another amazing entry for the new year, implemented {{< gh-hovercard "9539" "support for AMD's FidelityFX Super Resolution (FSR) in the OpenGL backend." >}}
```

The solution came from an overclocking background again.
[memtestCL](https://github.com/ihaque/memtestCL) is a tool to test stability of video memory: you set a size, how many iterations to run, and the compute load will compare results, informing you of any errors.
Running yuzu and memtestCL at the same time completely fixed the downclocking issues of AMD cards!

Some small discussions and prototyping later, and a solution was starting to take shape.
Creating and running an OpenCL/CUDA process in parallel was deemed to be too much work, and could be sent to the background by the scheduler, nullifying any gain.
Instead, we decided to use Vulkan’s own compute capabilities.
A useless dummy load will constantly run on the GPU, forcing it to always keep its clocks as high as possible, and with it, the power consumption.

{{< imgs
	"./turboperf.png| Four of the most GPU intensive games. Lower end cards like the infamous RX 6500 XT can see jumps as high as 70%"
  >}}

While this is a simple solution, it has a few drawbacks that forced us to sadly not enable this option by default:

> First, not all users want to or can run their GPUs at maximum performance. On mobile devices, it results in terrible battery life, or hitting power limits on AMD and Intel APUs, like for example the Steam Deck, with its small 15W default TDP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, not all users want to or can run their GPUs at maximum performance. On mobile devices, it results in terrible battery life, or hitting power limits on AMD and Intel APUs, like the Steam Deck for example, with its small 15W default TDP.
```

    "./tqbug.png"
    "./tqfix.png"
    >}}

byte[] {{< gh-hovercard "9608" "corrected a mistake in the way yuzu treated swap intervals." >}}
One method for limiting framerate on the Switch is to set a number controlling how many times a frame will be presented, where presentation happens 60 times per second.
A program could limit itself to 30 frames per second by setting this number to 2, 20 frames per second by setting this value to 3, and so on.
yuzu mistakenly treated the swap interval as being based on powers of two, so the values of 1 and 2, corresponding to 60 and 30 frames per second, worked correctly, but a value of 3 incorrectly presented at 15 frames per second.
While fixing this mistake, byte[] also added support for mod developers to use negative values as _multiples_ of 60 frames per second.
Let the (high-framerate) games begin!

epicboy also {{< gh-hovercard "9708" "fixed a longstanding issue with asynchronous shader building on OpenGL," >}} forcing shaders to be fully flushed and available to the main rendering context before signalling availability.
This should alleviate any persistent graphical errors exclusive to asynchronous shaders in the old API.

> [Blinkhawk](https://github.com/FernandoS27) returns with another {{< gh-hovercard "9559" "significant performance improvement" >}} for the world's seemingly-least optimized Pokémon games, allowing them to render in our much faster, but lower-accuracy, GPU Normal mode, as well as a few related optimizations along the way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Blinkhawk](https://github.com/FernandoS27) returns with another {{< gh-hovercard "9559" "significant performance improvement" >}} for the world's seemingly-least optimized Pokémon games. This allows them to render in our much faster, but lower-accuracy, GPU Normal mode, and implements a few related optimizations along the way.
```

Have fun shiny hunting!

{{< single-title-imgs
    "If you ask why all pics are in the same area, it's one of the best benchmarking spots. Normal accuracy on the left, High accuracy on the right (Pokémon Scarlet)"
    "./psn.png"
    "./psh.png"
    >}}

> Keep in mind that Normal GPU accuracy will produce vertex explosions for a frame, but they should only last that long and not be permanent now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that Normal GPU accuracy will produce vertex explosions for a frame, but only last just as long. Permanent vertex explosions be gone!
```

We are also able to render some simpler games, but be aware: most things don't work yet.
Baby steps!

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
    "It's hard to describe, has the performance, but lacks the features, but has modern features"
    "./mvkbug.png"
    "./mvkfix.png"
    >}}

## General changes

byte[] {{< gh-hovercard "9561" " triggered the scheduled mandatory Dynarmic update," >}} blessing us with [fastmem and page table support](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-fastmem/) for ARM64 devices, boosting performance considerably.
Anyone with an ARM64 device running a “normal” GPU (not mobile-tier hardware) interested in testing yuzu, feel free to install our official [Flatpak](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.yuzu_emu.yuzu).

[german77](https://github.com/german77) stumbled upon an issue which was causing input threads to randomly crash yuzu for seemingly no reason, but only on shutdown.

> byte[] found that `CoreTiming` had the same logic issue that he fixed last month in kernel code when adding `KHardwareTimer`: callbacks could be removed while in-progress, which could cause the input threads to continue using memory after it had been freed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
byte[] found that `CoreTiming` had the same logic issue that he fixed last month in the kernel code when adding `KHardwareTimer`: callbacks could be removed while in-progress, which could cause the input threads to continue using memory after it had been freed. 
```

This change also adds the extra logic of returning to regular input if the TAS stick reaches a value of 0 in both axes.

And to end the TAS changes, MonsterDruide1 also now {{< gh-hovercard "9565" "shows the progress of multiple scripts" >}} when several controllers are running their own records, for example, `TAS state: Running 35/100, 20, 0, 40`.
Now all players in local multiplayer matches can get their corresponding information.

On the topic of regular input, german77 has been busy improving it, and he has implemented a couple of changes that we think many will like.

For our keyboard and mouse fans, there’s now {{< gh-hovercard "9605" "support for mapping the mouse wheel" >}} to any button.
Sounds like a simple way to switch gear in `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild` to me, for example.

german77 has been gluing his eyes to some unit tests lately trying to find out why `EARTH DEFENSE FORCE: WORLD BROTHERS` would outright ignore input in some cases.

> After several back and forths between yuzu and the real deal Switch meal, he found out that the stick range didn’t seem to have minimum value of -32768, the usual value expected from a 16-bit signed integer (a range of -32768 to 32767), and instead seemed to have a minimum of -32766.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After several back and forths between yuzu and the real Switch, he found out that the stick range didn’t seem to have minimum value of -32768, the usual value expected from a 16-bit signed integer (a range of -32768 to 32767), and instead seemed to have a minimum of -32766.
```

{{< imgs
	"./input.png| Unpatched Switch consoles are invaluable for us"
  >}}

Okay, [Nintendo is as Nintendo does](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VreFw1Zd020), have it your way, we will just {{< gh-hovercard "9617" "fix the minimum stick range" >}} in our code.
Problem solved, right?

No.

As it turns out, this is a game bug. 

> You can get the Switch to reach -32767 under certain conditions, and `EARTH DEFENSE FORCE: WORLD BROTHERS` will also refuse to accept input then, on the real hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get the Switch to reach -32767 under certain conditions, and `EARTH DEFENSE FORCE: WORLD BROTHERS` will _also_ refuse to accept input on the real hardware.
```

  >}}

Enjoy finding new ways to break your games with this!

## UI changes

This one has been cooking for over 2 years now, sheesh.
Morph originally started working on {{< gh-hovercard "4949" "improving the high DPI support" >}} of yuzu all the way back in November of 2020.
Now it’s ready, and the results are great. 
Users that run displays at DPI values over 100% can now see proper UI element scaling, particularly noticeable in the controls setting window.

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
    "Now 4K display users rejoice"
    "./dpibug.png"
    "./dpifix.png"
    >}}

Nothing is safe from bugs in the user interface code, and Wollnashorn found an interesting one affecting LDN.
The Direct Connect window asks the user for an IP and nickname.

{{< imgs
	"./dc.png| We believe in recycling here, that includes pics"
  >}}

Those settings got lost every time a game was booted.
Well, the issue was that those settings were being saved on the per-game configuration files for no reason.
There’s no reason to include a fundamentally global setting in the per-game settings, so {{< gh-hovercard "9521" "moving them away" >}} solved the issue.

> byte[] solved an issue making accessing fullscreen crash, sorry, let’s say it like the bug report, making yuzu CRASH!!
> {{< gh-hovercard "9601" "Adjusting the behaviour of yuzu’s bootmanager" >}} was enough to stop the CRASH!!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
byte[] solved an issue where accessing fullscreen would cause yuzu to crash.
{{< gh-hovercard "9601" "Adjusting the behaviour of yuzu’s bootmanager" >}} was enough to stop the [CRASH!!](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/issues/9550)
```

Newcomer [SaiKai](https://github.com/SaiKai) implements one of those Quality of Life changes that you can’t live without and you can’t believe it wasn’t a thing before.

> Now pressing and holding the hotkey assigned to lowering or raising {{< gh-hovercard "9637" "volume will auto-repeat," >}} making it much easier to control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pressing and holding the hotkey assigned to lowering or raising {{< gh-hovercard "9637" "volume will now auto-repeat," >}} making it much easier to control.
```

Thanks!

> Per-game configuration returns to mess with us, now with the language selection.
> The language combobox index gets altered in per-game configuration, so setting the region to Korea or Taiwan would result in a crash.
> german77 {{< gh-hovercard "9660" "fixes this discrepancy" >}} solving the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Per-game configuration returns to mess with us, now with the language selection.
The language ComboBox index gets altered in per-game configuration, so setting the region to Korea or Taiwan would result in a crash.
german77 {{< gh-hovercard "9660" "fixes this discrepancy" >}} and solves the issue.
```

## Hardware section

Let’s revive this section for a bit, there’s some information I’d like to discuss.

#### NVIDIA, forgetting about their old cards.

We previously mentioned that the 527.XX release of drivers solved issues we previously had with Pascal and newer cards.
While this was true for most issues, Pascal is still hitting some of the old problems, like crashes with ASTC texture decoding enabled.
We recommend Pascal users to either disable ASTC texture decoding, or revert back to 512.95 drivers.
We hope NVIDIA backports the fixes Turing and newer cards got to the old guard too.

#### AMD, custom drivers are not good

> The recently released RX 7000 series, or RDNA3, are not particularly good with emulators right now, with yuzu not being an exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recently released RX 7000 series, or RDNA3, are not particularly compatible with emulators right now, with yuzu not being an exception.
```

Broken rendering and crashes were reported by early adopters.

Sadly, we can’t focus on these products while they run a custom driver branch. 
Until AMD merges the RDNA3 driver with the regular Polaris to RDNA2 one we’re all used to, it’s impossible to focus efforts on trying to solve any particular issues of this new release.
Sorry early adopters, you will have to wait.

Having access to hardware that doesn’t cost NVIDIA-stupid levels would also help. 
AMD, please don’t take a year to release the mid and low end.

> Now, regarding non-official custom drivers, we got reports that Amermine Zone drivers break rendering in many games. 
> Regular drivers are perfectly fine, so just stick to official AMD releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, regarding unofficial custom drivers, we received reports that Amermine Zone drivers break rendering in many games. 
Regular drivers are perfectly fine, so just stick to official AMD releases.
```

#### Intel, artificial limitations capping good hardware

> Your writer recently had to replace an old i3 5005U laptop because its WiFi died, HP only allows a very limited selection of cards as replacements, and such parts are no longer in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your writer recently had to replace an old i3-5005U laptop because its WiFi died, but HP only allows a very limited selection of cards as replacements, and said parts are no longer in production.
```

I’m never buying HP ever again.

Sorry, back on topic.

> This was a great opportunity to get an Iris Xe GPU, so an i5 1240P was acquired. 
> ASUS this time.
> As this was first hand experience for a tester with a Gen 12 Intel GPU, we now have both good and bad information to pass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was a great opportunity to get an Iris Xe GPU, so an i5-1240P was acquired. 
ASUS this time.
As this was first hand experience for a tester with a Gen 12 Intel GPU, we now have both good and bad information to discuss.
```

Let’s start with the bad, and this is something that affects many users, as it is the default configuration of most laptops.

> Intel, in their *infinite wisdom*, decided that single channel memory configurations should [artificially limit the integrated GPU to the slower UHD Graphics spec](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/support/articles/000059744/graphics.html), reducing its EU (execution units) count. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Intel, in their *infinite wisdom*, decided that single channel memory configurations should [artificially limit the integrated GPU to the slower UHD Graphics spec](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/support/articles/000059744/graphics.html), reducing its EU (execution unit) count. 
```

Basically, running the GPU with half its cylinders.

> Unless the user pays the premium for a dual channel configuration, or has the option to manually add the extra SO-DIMM stick later, performance on Intel Xe devices, sorry, “UHD Graphics”, is *terrible*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unless the user pays the premium for a dual channel configuration, or has the option to manually add the extra SO-DIMM stick later, performance on Intel Xe devices, or “UHD Graphics”, is *terrible*.
```

Most 3D games can’t run at playable framerates even at 0.5x handheld scaling.

To top it out, it’s very clear that Vulkan drivers are still a weak spot with Intel hardware.

> It’s a lottery with each game, they may perform correctly, similar to their AMD and NVIDIA counterparts, or may have glaring issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s a lottery with each game. They may perform correctly, similar to their AMD and NVIDIA counterparts, or may have glaring issues.
```

Since these GPUs only have a single queue, Xe users should disable ASTC texture decoding from yuzu’s graphics settings. 
Most of the time the Xe GPU will be the bottleneck, and making it constantly switch between decoding textures and rendering the game will incur a performance loss.
Letting the CPU carry this work will help graphical performance. 
Finally some good use for those E-Cores.

For those that don’t fear noise or heat, tweaking the sliders in [XTU](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/download/17881/29183/intel-extreme-tuning-utility-intel-xtu.html?) is an easy way to get an extra GHz out of their CPUs while plugged in. 
This can help double the performance in yuzu.

Unfortunately, Intel’s EoL status regarding Windows drivers is starting to affect compatibility with recent games, so we officially consider Gen 9/9.5/11 Intel GPUs to be out of support on yuzu.
This covers Gen 6 to 11 CPUs, Skylake to Ice Lake.
We will provide support and log issues for them only if they run on Linux. 
Or, well, macOS, once MoltenVK is fully working.

## Future projects

I’m still under a sort of “NDA” with the developers, so I’m not allowed to tell you what’s cooking yet, or else.

> The intel branch still managed to pass along a bit of information before going dark, `Project Lime`, a co-development between bunnei, Tobi, german77, and byte[].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our spies still managed to pass along a bit of information before going dark, `Project Lime`, a co-development between bunnei, Tobi, german77, and byte[].
```

Changed wording as a large section was just talking about "Intel" and this could confuse readers.

Stay tuned for its official announcement.

`Project Gaia` continues to progress slowly, growing closer to the internal beta testing phase.
Some of its standalone features have already been tested:

{{< imgs
	"./gaia.png| This was a performance test to see how long it takes to load a game list"
  >}}

> A bit of sad news for outdated hardware users: we have discussed plans to discontinue OpenGL.
> Fixes and improvements that are critical for Vulkan are becoming a chore to port to OpenGL, and, as you’ve seen with the progress on MoltenVK support, we have to worry about new devices that depend exclusively on Vulkan. 
> It won’t be very soon, but it’s time to consider getting a GPU with Vulkan support, you know, something from the last 11 years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A bit of sad news for outdated hardware users: we have discussed plans to discontinue OpenGL.
Fixes and improvements that are critical for Vulkan are becoming a chore to port to OpenGL, and, as you’ve seen with the progress on MoltenVK support, we have to worry about new devices that depend exclusively on Vulkan. 
It won’t be very soon, but it’s time to consider getting a GPU with Vulkan support, you know, something made within the last 11 years.
```

That’s all folks!

> Thank you so much for staying until the end.
> And very special thanks to Mysterious Writer B, without their help, this article would have been seriously delayed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thank you for reading to the end.
And very special thanks to Mysterious Writer B, without their help, this article would have been seriously delayed.
```

{{< imgs

> 	"./byte.jpg| Out of the night, when the full moon is bright, comes a horseman known as B…"

Reviewer: Let's reduce the size of this image. It takes up a ton of space.
